Everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the Decent.
I'm your host, as always Ricardo Lob. And today
I'm joined by Dr Seth Robertson. He is a
lecturer in Philosophy and associate Director of undergraduate studies
at Harvard University. His research interests include moral psychology,
the history of ethics, early Chinese ethics, social epistemology,
virtue, ethics, and meta ethics. And today we're talking
about normative theorizing and if it should be informed
by non normative information per perspective or naturalism, Confucian
ethics and some other related topics. So, Doctor Robertson,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much Ricardo for having me. It's
a pleasure to be here. I'm excited to chat
about some of these topics.
So I would like to start by asking you
about normative theorizing, but perhaps it's better for us
to start with some definitions or with a little
bit of background here. So, uh first of all,
what is normative theorizing? What do you mean by
that? And on the other hand, what is non
normative information?
Yeah, great. So this is something that has been
interesting to me for a very long time even
in my very first undergraduate ethics class. I remember
asking questions about this. And so here's a really
general question that doesn't actually, you know, fully answer
what you asked about, but is a good starting
point. So, yeah, two questions. So one is to
do ethics. Well, as a philosopher, as an ethicist,
do you need to learn about things? Do you
need to study things other than ethics, other than
ethical theory? So that's one question, uh, slightly different.
I maybe substantially different question is to do ethics
well, personally, to be a good person, to make
good moral decisions, what do you need to know
beyond ethical theory? I mean, some philosophers and non
philosophers might ask you to need to know that
much about ethical theory. Um There's interesting research on
that, including some that you've um talked to some
folks doing on your show. Um But sort of
to get at this question, what do we mean
by normative and non, these are terms that we
use in philosophy all the time and don't always
explain exactly what we mean to students when we
say them, I remember a friend of mine in
graduate school and my master's program after studying philosophy
at the graduate level for two years that I
still don't know what normative means. Um But so
what I mean by it and this, I mean,
I don't think, I mean, anything all that special
or different by it, but there are questions about
what should we do, what should we believe? What
should we feel? What should we think? Um Those
are normative questions, some questions that have to do
with what should s goods bads, right or wrong.
Um Typically in philosophy, when we like talk about
normative normativity, we're usually thinking about morality, ethics. But
so like questions about what should we do or,
you know, maybe what kind of person should we
try to become? What kind of character trait should
we try to develop? What kind of motivations should
we have for our actions? What kind of reasons
should we have in our ethical decision making? But
of course, there are lots of shoulds beyond moral,
right? So there's like what we say, like epistemic.
So what should I believe? What am I like?
What am I justified in believing something? Um There
are sort of like prudential should so like given
what I want, given my own life happiness or
flourishing, what should I pursue? Should I take this
job or that job? Right. What should I major
in? Um Should I be friends with this person?
Would they be a good friend or not? So
all of these questions about should, should do, should
decide to do, should believe, should think these are
like normative questions, right? And, and you know, 20th
century thought there was often a kind of strong
divide between normative and non normative questions. And we
have different ways of describing that. Sometimes we see
like prescriptive versus descriptive. Right. And so I guess,
you know, like, as, you know, very well, um,
in the 20th century there's a, there's was sort
of a widespread belief in academia, right, that certain
fields of study are doing mostly non normative work,
they're trying to understand how the world works. Right.
So, like, the sciences are trying to understand how
the world works and normativity, ethics, that sort of
stuff that, like wishy washy stuff. Like maybe they
can talk about that in philosophy departments. But no,
that's not what we're doing. We're trying to figure
out how the world world really works. And so
you get, like people say, there's like this really
strong distinction between like facts and opinions or facts
and values. Um AND things like that. Now more
recently, people have pointed out that, you know, this
is actually really messy sort of thing. Like you
can't do science without values, like, you know, good
evidence, rigor, um appreciation for truth, um appreciation for
honesty, like intellectual honesty, honestly reporting your data, things
like that. So it turns out that probably all
of our lives, including like our research lives in
academia, regardless of our field are infused with Normandy
and normativity in various ways. But so that was
like a very long winded explanation. It still didn't
get to the original question, right? Which was why
do I am I so interested in non normative
information for normative decision making. So even though, I
just sort of said, like it's a really, really
messy, everything is normative in various ways. I think
going back to the original way that the original
questions that I asked so to do ethics well,
to do moral philosophy. Well, what do you need
to know outside of ethical theory to be like
to make moral, your own moral decisions, your own
ethical decisions, um to decide what kind of ethical
person you wanna be. What do you need to
know beyond ethical theory and different philosophers, different people
have thought about this, there's a huge spectrum of
answers, right? Um Some people are very happy to
do like highly abstract philosophy, right? Sitting in their
armchair coming up with really really impressive complex robust
theories. Some people are happy to really, really get
into the weeds of debates about these theories, um
very rigorously and spend a lot of their time
doing ethics thinking about that and you know, very,
very, very abstract theoretical kind of work. Um And
I think that's, that's really, really important. I think
that's a valid, very valid and very important way
of doing moral philosophy, but it's a spectrum many
other philosophers have been interested in. Um WHAT do
we need to know about human psychology, human sociology,
human behavior. Um And how does that influence our
ethical theorizing? So like to give example in Kant's
groundwork for the Metaphysics of morals at the very
beginning, he makes this distinction So Kant write the
moral, like 17 hundreds, one of the great moral
philosophers um says, you know, there's metaphysics of morality
and that's these, you know, big philosophical questions about
how morality works. And there's the anthropology of morality.
And by that, he means like today, we would
probably say moral psychology, moral anthropology, one way of
thinking about this distinction is the philosophy comes first,
then you develop your ethical theory, you do like
really, really good critical thinking and then you figure
out how to apply that in the world. Real
world. So on that way of thinking about things,
the Phil philosophy and the, you know, real world
application are kind of separate and the philosophy is
first, other people throughout history and today have thought
that they're much more intertwined, right? Um And maybe
it's not as clear which one should have priority.
So for various reasons, um Aristotle and the Nicko
Ma and ethics famously said we're not trying to
just merely understand like what virtue is, the definition
of virtue, but to become virtuous. Um And so
the last thing that I'll say about this, I
sort of give an example, right? Um There are
sort of two big things where none yet to
get to the original question, non normative information matters.
So one is I think maybe not controversial at
all to make good decisions in general, you need
good information, right? Um So like when you're deciding
which politician to support, which policies do they support?
You need? No, like not like regular good information
about like will this policy actually be effective, will
trickle down economics work? Right? So regardless of what
you think about like the end goal, the morality
of the end goal will like that policy work.
Um And then there's sort of messy questions that
are kind of normative, non normative, like, OK, do
I trust this person? Right. So they say they're
gonna do this, these policies? Are they actually going
to do it or not? Right. Um So there's
this and I think that the vast majority of
philosophers throughout history would be very happy to grant
this. Um Then there's, and this is where I
think it's really interesting. Then there are sort of
deeper questions about um how much should that kind
of thing go feed back into our ethical theorizing.
Um How much should we be concerned about how
human moral psychology works? And I think the answer
and I'm not the only person I'm, you know,
at one end of the spectrum of philosophers, I
think it matters quite a bit.
Uh So o OK, so I have 21 or
two more questions about that. But let me just
say, and perhaps you can comment on it that
of course, on the show, I've already talked many
times with moral psychologists with uh uh with people
who work on morality from an anthropological perspective, from
the perspective of of game theory. And I guess
we could put all of this in the descriptive
camp of things, in the non normative informational camp
of things. And I, and I guess that when
it comes to our ethicists or moral philosophers, then
deal with this information. I mean, one of the
debates that interests me the most, for example, is
the debate in meta ethics between the moral realists
and the moral anti realists. And they pick uh
sometimes on the same information but use it in
different. So for example, the, the moral realists, they,
they already have some sort of uh framework in
mind and they say, oh, this is what we
should strive for, this is what's good to attain
and so on. And so with the constraints that
we know of about our uh moral psychology, then
this is the way we should strive toward these
goals, good, whatever and the moral anti or uh
or the, yeah, the moral anti realists, what they
do many times is that they bring to the
table information or knowledge from psychology, anthropology, sociology and
so on to build the case that there's really
not anything objective about morality out there, there's no
objective moral values. It's just a man of different
uh preferences, different psychological predispositions, people being exposed to
different cultural environments and so on. So, uh that's
for example, one of the ways that this sort
of um question that we're addressing here manifests in
both science and then how it gets applied to
philosophy or moral philosophy, more
specific. Right. Yeah. Absolutely. And I mean, I think
this is fascinating and I've also personally been there.
Right. So, um, I sort of switched in when
I was in graduate school from a moral realist
to a moral anti realist in large part because
of these concerns. And so I was one of
the people who was, like, you know, using some
of this, um, research from outside of psychology to
um argue both ways. I don't know that I'm,
you know, more correct now than I was in
the past. But yeah,
uh and so, uh but I mean, when you
talk about non normative information and it's possibly constraining
our no normative theorizing. What kinds of, of course,
I think you've already gave some examples then. Uh
But what kinds of non normative information are you?
Right. Exactly.
So, as I mentioned before, um I've for a
long time, been quite interested in, you know, empirical
research and moral psychology and related fields. Um And,
you know, just having a better understanding of how
our moral minds work and that's absolutely no easy
feat for multiple reasons. Um But I have for
a long time really thought that that's quite important,
but I don't think that's the only thing that's
really, really interesting and really, really useful for ethicist.
Um So for example, I also think that what
we might call like sort of philosophical anthropology is
really useful and what I mean by this and
things like moral slang. Um If you start thinking
about it, our moral vocabularies are just absolutely full
of ethical terms, right? And I think, you know,
especially characterological terms, terms, like describing robust traits. So
somebody, um and these are things that have, you
know, somebody is a jerk, right? Things that have
been explored by philosophers, like including philosophers that you
venture read, right? Um There's a really good and
that's like Eric Schwitz Gables works. There's a really
good little paper by the philosopher Bonnie Man on
being a creep. Like what does it mean to
be a creep? Um You know, the there's so
much really interesting work about like, yeah, moral slang
and yeah, you start to like how many words
we have like a rat, a snitch, a mensch
an OG, right? There, we have so many words
I'm describing people. Um And, and traits. And so
I think that's really interesting. Um A recent paper
that I had on this was like, what's wrong
with unhelpful comments? Right? So I got really interested
in when people describe that was a really unhelpful
thing to say or that was an unhelpful comment.
What were like, what are they really saying? Um
So for me, I like people are constantly making
moral claims, epistemic claims, normative claims in general, they're
using normative vocabulary and often in really, really interesting
ways. Um So I think it's worth investigating that.
And how does that work? I think there's often
lots of really interesting lessons there. And the last
thing that I wanted to mention um specifically, and
this is something that's really influenced my work is
um just the fact that we're socially situated creatures,
we live in societies and those societies have entrenched
power structures, right? So, um various people and groups
have more power than others and they build that
into our systems and societies, right? And so I
think, and this is again, it's not just me
and there's a spectrum of philosophers who are concerned
about this and philosophy, we often call this like
non ideal approaches, right? So um when we do
our theorizing and ethics or epistemology, we're really, really
concerned and think we need to take account of
the fact that um different groups and people have
more power than others and use that power in
various ways. And we need to have our theories
like really, really being paying attention to that.
So, keeping in mind one of the points you
made earlier that and this is something that I've
already talked with other people on the show that
uh values also play a role in science and
in the production of scientific knowledge. So keeping that
caveat in mind uh just to close the section
of the uh so should you then should you
uh uh do you think then that we should
or should non normative information, constrain or normative theorizing.
Yeah. Yeah, I think absolutely, it should in a
lot of different ways. Right. So, and I mean,
again, with the caveat that, you know, the, the
distinction is incredibly messy and, you know, maybe it's
a spectrum at best. Um But, and some of
this sort of might make more sense once we
see applications of like, what would this actually look
like in practice? Um But yeah, so if you
sort of take it as a like a descriptive
claim that in fact, the way that, you know,
human societies work is that they're quite often hierarchical,
they often have entrenched hierarchies of power. Um If
you could say that that's non no, like just
grant, that's more on the non normative side, that's
more on the descriptive side. I think that um
theories that don't pay serious attention to that maybe
even in the very first steps of theorizing, um
it's just a potentially dangerous move. Um You might
be missing out on incredibly important things and your
theories might not be well placed to actually address
these problems when we get there. And so this
is again, um for philosophers, this is the non
ideal stuff, right?
And of course, I guess that you would agree
if I say that here when it comes to
the kinds of non normative information that we deal
with it and then uh normative rise about ethics
and moral philosophy, we have to keep in mind
that of course, it's not as simple as we
have and um a sort of human nature that
is fixed because, I mean, that learned through human
behavioral ecology and anthropology and some other disciplines, uh
I mean, of course, we have certain evolved through
these positions, but they are much more, much more
malleable than uh just uh like evolutionary theory just
by self would tell you.
Absolutely. And to me, this is an incredibly important
point. Um JUST this, like, even from a, like
a purely evolutionary standpoint, even that is incredibly messy,
right? So, yeah, it's sort of like very simplistic
claims about human nature. I mean, one of my
favorite, like, least favorite, you get like an intro
of philosophy class, right? Students, you know, human beings
are inherently selfish, right? That's like one of the
more like, well, what does it mean to be
inherently like from an evolutionary perspective? Well, we have
all sorts of things that, you know, maybe are
more hardwired, but that's like there's tons of different
stuff going on in our brains and that's not
even, well, like once we add in culture to
the mix and like how those things interact. Um
So I think it's incredibly important that this is
all incredibly messy um because that makes it more
difficult to have a nice, simple theory that can
explain it all.
Mhm Yeah. And I mean, uh that came to
my mind also because since you mentioned, for example,
people thinking that we are innately predisposed toward the
building hierarchical societies. I mean, yeah, that might be
true to some extent. But then if you assume
that there's no malleability to that, then you will
inevitably build the hierarchical society when perhaps in certain
contexts that it could not apply.
Right. Exactly. Yeah. So it, yeah. And doesn't imply
that, you know, we need to do things in
a certain way or the Yeah, because, yeah. So
I think it's is always a complex question and
answer and it needs a lot of investigation figuring.
OK, so what actually are we supposed to do?
That's incredibly difficult to figure out. And then there's
sort of like given that what can we do
about it, that's also incredibly difficult to figure out
and people will have a tendency to oversimplify these
things.
And so I guess that related to what we've
been talking about, could you tell us a little
bit about the sort of novel version of meta
ethical, human, human constructivism that you called perspective or
naturalism?
Is that good? Yeah. So, so this is, so
I should say, um this was work in my
dissertation. Um So it's something that's been in sort
of in the back of my mind for the
past four or five years. And what I was
really trying to do there is sort of figure
out what do I really believe about all of
this, what my own approach because I was really
torn. Right. So you've had so many great philosophers
and people specialize in meta ethics who can talk
about this much more fluently and correctly than I
can. But what I like what I wanna say,
so it's really interesting to me that we're so,
like, meta ethically muddled. On the one hand, like,
students come into my ethics classes, they have such
strong political opinions, they have strong ethical opinions, but
at the same time, they'll like, really strongly assert
things like, well, morality is relative or this is
all subjective. And it's like, well, how do you
square away this really strong assertion of about like
morality, it's relative, it's subjective, but at the same
time having really, really, really strong moral or political
opinions. Um AND, you know, those are the questions
at the heart of meta ethics, right? And so
like long time listeners of your show, like we
have heard, you know, this distinction, moral realism and
anti realism and the like the and history of
that is maybe early on in the 20th century
by realism. Are there moral facts or their moral
truths? But then as the discussion went on and
on and on, sort of like, as you've already
sort of mentioned, the discussion shifted to thinking about
objectivity, right? Are there objective moral truths or objective
moral facts? And what do we mean by objective
that's incredibly difficult to say. But the general sort
of idea that developed is like, sort of compare
certain other fields of study, like certain sciences or
history where the facts that they're like, the fact
of the matter it's out there, it doesn't depend
on anything about our minds. Maybe the way that
we explain, it depends on our minds. But the
thing that is being studying is like, it's out
there. Um That's what we mean roughly by very,
incredibly, roughly by objective and anti realist of various
stripes. Um We say no morality, moral claims, moral
and moral claims depend in some way or they
weren't, you know, the old school version was they
aren't factual at all. Right. They're just sort of
expressing our emotions or something like that. Um But
the sort of, many of the newer versions are
saying, you know, they're not objective, that's that they
aren't based entirely on stuff outside of our minds.
So, and this is something when people start learning
about this, they sort of, you know, been told
they've heard so many times that morality is subjective,
morality is relative. And, you know, there is like
something to that in the sense that, yeah, if
you studied abroad, if you lived in different cultures,
you know, that, you know, people's behaviors and opinions
and things like that vary quite a bit. Um
But again, at the same time, we have these
really strong like political beliefs, moral beliefs about various
things. So philosophers have been really like more recently,
the past 30 or 40 years have been really
attracted to moral realism. It makes sense of things
like, um the civil, right? Like, racism is genuinely
unjust, sexism is genuinely unjust. If you believe those
sorts of things, how can you make sense of
that without being a realist? And so I was,
like, very much in that camp and then I
encountered evolutionary debunking arguments and to defer a long
and, you know, you've talked about this on your
show, right? So I won't like go into tons
of detail about this. But for a long time,
I was like, no, this can't be right. But
this general idea really was in the back of
my mind that if you start with the assumption
that morality, ethics could have been, if it's objective,
it could have been anything, right? Like what would
be the objective moral truth? Well, they could be
anything. How would we figure them out? And the
idea of evolutionary debunking arguments and again, long time
listeners know this, but like the very, very general
and maybe overly simplistic idea is, well, our intuitions
about what we morally should do are shaped by
many factors and like important set of them are
evolutionary, the kind of creatures that we are, right?
And so my example of this, which is like,
you know, kind of strong, but I think is
relevant is um if we were highly evolved spiders,
our ethical systems would look entirely different. We wouldn't
care so much about raising, like raising our Children
and protecting Children. We wouldn't care so much about
that. Um And so the, the very rough intuition
underlying at the like evolutionary debunking arguments is that
one of the key factors shaping our ethical, like
our ethical intuitions is our evolutionary history. They weren't
necessarily tracking truth and I came to think more
and more and more. There's something to that now
you might say in response, um Well, that might
um pose some trouble for some approaches and meta
ethics. But here's, there's other approaches that are perfectly
safe. So like the word here is like intuition
stick approaches, right? So you might say something like,
OK, this is kind of like probability. We're naturally
not very good at doing probability, right? That's why
it took so long to figure out, but we
could figure it out, right? We figured out how
to do math in general. We do the math,
we do the logic. Like once you've got rationality
and logic on the table, you can figure things
out. And so even if like we were evolutionary
not predisposed to figuring out objective moral truth, we
could figure it out using rationality and logic or
something like that, I was initially attracted to that
view quite a bit. But then, you know, and
like a lot of these views, well, maybe some
truths are self evident, right? But then I realize
this, like I call it like the unicorn or
the hobbit problem, right? So claims like unicorns have
horns or hobbits have big feet, right? Like Lord
of the Rings, right? So these are like fiction
entities, like are those claims true? Um Like are
they self evidence? But yeah, sort of like if
you understand what the words mean. Yeah, unicorns have,
but that doesn't mean that the property is being
described actually exist in the world, right? So I
started to worry that moral claims like murder is
wrong is the go to example of like, that's
self evident. Like it just means murder is wrongful
killing. Um But if you're saying that that um
like murder means objectively wrongful killing. The fact that
it's like a self evident truth. If it is
self, if that is self evident, I'm not sure
that the objective part there is self evident to
anyone other than certain philosophers. But even if you
grant that and to me that doesn't imply that
that property being described exists in this world, right?
So I think that there is um a dangerous
leap there. And again, like I'm not a meta
ethics specialist. I was just trying to figure this
out for myself. So I started to think like
um the strong, like the strongest versions of moral
realism or morality is really, really objective. I just
couldn't see my way to thinking that those were
correct anymore. Now, throughout history, there's been like two
big lines of responses to this one is a
really strong anti realist kind of response. And I
think you like in Ancient India there's like a
school called the Charva. And they say this, you
see this in some of Plato's like dial of
their Simic. You see this in the like the
gorgeous um you see this in um the History
of Thucydides, history of the Peloponnesian war, the Melian
dialogue, the dialogue between the Athenians and the millions,
the Athenian side, people say, you know, ethics, it's
just a invention, reality is just an invention of
some sort. And so anyone who believes in it
that is just being silly. Um I think you
also, there's a Chin ancient Chinese text called Robert
J. Um You also get an argument like that.
So anyone who believes in morality, come on, it's
all made up, it's all constructed. You're just a
fool for believing in it. That's one route that
people have gone another route that is maybe like
technically anti realist in the sense that it says
the morality isn't like fully objective like this says,
OK, yeah, but we care about all this stuff
that's kind of like a basic premise in evolutionary
debunking arguments, right, that we do care about. And
so there's some the idea is like given that
we care about it, are there better or worse
ways of doing it? And that in the most
general terms is kind of the constructivist picture in
meta ethics and now there are, you know, much
more theoretically robust and precise and rigorous ways of
stating it, but that's the sort of general intuition
that we care about things like we would say
that we have a valuated standpoint. Um And what
can we do given that? Now, there are different
ways of cashing that out. So the, and this
work here is the Phil um Sharon Street's excellent
work um exploring this. And so there's like a
Kent thought that, you know, all of these standpoints
where we care about things should probably be governed
by the basic rules of logic. Like, don't contradict
yourself and write K thinks that you can get
quite a bit of morality out of that basic
intuition. And so it isn't quite objective, but it
is that like every standpoint should have be concerned
with these sorts of things. So it's kind of
like, um pretty close to objective without being objective.
It's still based in our standpoints and our concerns.
Um THE human approach. All right. So like David
Hume, um 1700 Scottish philosopher sort of says that
there are so many different practical standpoints that not
only people could have, but all sorts of like
moral creatures that aliens or something like that could
have had. And so there isn't going to be
a single theory that applies to all of them.
Um And so he humans, so like quick examples
are like, he thinks we're naturally like sympathetic empathetic,
we care about others well being in various ways.
So that's a concern. Then he also sorts of
thinks that they're um given our various concerns, there
might be values that we need to develop, maybe
invent our artificial virtues. So he thinks like justice
is something like this. Um And that it's like,
not maybe we, he thinks, you know, maybe we
don't have naturally strong inclinations about justice or dispositions
to care about it, but to get society to
function, given the things we do care about it,
we need to create something like that. The approach
that I kind of took on today, I would
probably call it something like a Confucian constructivism. Um
Yeah, we're going to talk about it. So I
kind of knew that I was like, thinking about
this, but it didn't really strike me until my
dissertation defense when one of my teachers, one wonderful,
wonderful teacher, Amy Oberon was like, this is like,
Shun, the great, one of the greatest Confucian philosophers
like this is Shun are web born. I was
like, oh, yeah, it actually is. Um So, um
my thought and was one of the sort of
like anti realist moves that wants to keep doing
mostly what we've been doing, not throw it all
away, sort of his thought about philos um ethics
as a kind of technology or an invention. And
that's a good thing. Right. That's, that doesn't mean
that we should just throw it all away. Um
So, one of the earliest statements of this is
the person I just mentioned, Shinza who is a
ancient Confucian philosopher, he literally says the ancient SAGES
invented ritual and rightness and so kind of like
small ethical things and big ethical things that the
ancient SAGES invented it. Like that's like the term
that he uses. Um And I already mentioned Hume's
artificial um versus famously. Um John Mackey's invent ethics
inventing right and wrong. One of the most famous
important influential works of anti realism. Um He says,
like, you know, the morality is not to be
discovered but made. Um There's in Plato's dialogue, the
Protagoras um Protagoras gives us, it was, I guess
a quite a famous speech in the ancient world.
It's not so f as f quite as famous
today in contemporary philosophy, but he sort of says
that um when the gods created humans first, it
was a mess, they couldn't get anything to stay,
the humans just fought each other. And so then
the gods decided to give them a sense of
justice and a sense of shame and then humans
could cooper and society and like live together in
cities. And one that was really influential for me
and kind of where that name perspective, naturalism came
from. Um WAS a philosopher um Philip Kit's um
book, The Ethical Project, which came out almost. Well,
I guess, yeah, 10 a little bit more than
10 years ago. Now and he developed this view
called pragmatic naturalism. So he was interested in the
American pragmatist. So, like John Dewey, um Ker really
likes this quote from Dewey that um moral conceptions
and processes grow naturally out of the very conditions
of human life, right? We're just moral creatures if
we don't think too much about what morality means
there. But um so kids think like, yeah, it's,
we're just more naturally morally concerned. And so what
Kitcher thinks is like the, the view that he
developed there in that book was basically something like
this that were kind of naturally altruistic. And that's,
you know, he spends a lot of time sorting
out what do we mean by altruism? If you
were like a certain kind of scientist, especially in
the, you know, sixties, seventies, that would be preposterous.
Um But for like kids, you know, we are
naturally like other concerns in various ways, but we
have many altruism like he calls altruism failures. So
we're concerned with others, but not that well. And
this leads to sort of like an internal tension,
a felt tension. And so he thinks that ethics
like ethical theorizing and it's like earliest forms is
developing out of this and we develop systems to
try to cope with this tension and none of
the systems are perfect. They have their own internal
tensions. And so we update them to fix those
internal tensions or to alleviate those. And we just
sort of keep doing that. Um But the original,
the idea here and for many of these views
is there's a specific function of ethics. And so
the sort of way of thinking about it, the
um metaphor is sort of like ethics as a
technology, right, where technology is, you know, like a
can opener, can opener. It's, there's a specific problem
that you need to solve and the, and the
technology is designed to solve it. And so do
you evaluate whether the instance of the technology is
good or bad based on how well it serves
that function? So does the can opener open cans?
Well, right. Um I thought there was something really,
really fascinating and probably correct about this. But as
we alluded towards earlier, morality is so messy, right?
Even like from, you know, purely evolutionary perspective, there's
so much going on. So many of the moral
intuitions that we have feelings and attitudes, like morally
relevant, feelings, attitudes, dispositions, um emotions evolved at different
times and for different reasons. And then once you
add culture into the mix um personal upbringing, um
even like philosophical theorizing, it's just a complete mess.
And so I thought sort of thinking about is
much as that. I thought that these views were
getting something right? Thinking about morality is having kind
of a single underlying function function or a small
set of them wasn't the right way to go.
And so I started thinking about um ethics I
could at the time, I called it like ethics
as design today, I would say like cosign. And
so the idea is like a slightly different metaphor
where when you're designing something, there isn't like one
consideration that you're trying to maximize you have multiple
considerations that you're trying to weigh. Um There isn't
necessarily one best way of doing it. There's multiple
different ways that you can balance these multiple considerations.
But then where does this perspective a bit come
in? This is one of the things that I,
so I should say there's been really, really, really
cool work on perspective um by philosophers like Elizabeth
Camp and um Kate Elgin um in the past,
you know, 1015 years. And so by perspective, what's
really interesting to me about that? What I mean
by that is like perspectives, filter information. And we
think in terms of perspective that's we don't have
access to all of the information out there, right?
We don't have access to all the information in
our mind when we have a perspective, a perspective,
sort of highlights some information it hides or includes
some information. And it's an essential feature of how
we think we think in terms of perspectives. So
I've been interested in this for a long time.
Um I also got interested in thinking about like
what does this mean for ethical theorizing, right? And
so, and this might like might be a segue
to some of the other stuff to talk about.
But I was really struck by and, like, recently
gave a talk and I started, but, like, have
you ever noticed that what's obvious varies from academic
department to department? Um. Right. And so I was,
you know, my master's program, I was, like, doing
lots of utilitarian stuff. My intuitions were really utilitarian.
My phd program, I was suddenly surrounded by virtue
ethicists and it was just as intuitive to them
that virtue, ethics made sense and was approached. Now
I'm surrounded by contents and it's, you know, the
ways that people talk like it just as it's
obvious for some people to talk about morality in
terms of principles, it was just as obvious to
talk about morality in terms of virtues and that,
you know, really struck like, why are people so
confident in their intuitions? Well, partly the reason is
when you occupy a perspective for a long time
perspective, makes perspectives make thing out things obvious, right?
So I think that has lots of implications that
one of the implications that will make sense at
this point in our discussion is even the complexity
of morality that we've been like mentioned several times.
My thought was that there couldn't be a like
we wouldn't, we shouldn't want a single correct moral
theory because the idea is if we occupy perspectives,
a perspective is like going to highlight some things
that's very useful, but it's also going to hide
some things and there's more information than any psychological
perspective that we could actually occupy or moral information
that we would want our moral theories um in
general to be able to capture that any single
one perspective could. And so the thought was that
actually we should be pluralist when it comes to
doing moral theory, because no single approach is going
to capture everything that we needed to capture.
So by being pluralist, in the specific case of
ethical theory, you're talking about bringing together, for example,
consequentialism, virtue, virtue, ethics, the ontology.
Yeah, exactly. Things like that, that um it might
be really, really useful to, you know, be a
content about certain things, but it should not be
the only perspective because again, it highlights certain things
really well and that's incredibly useful. Um But, and
yeah, and this is something that, you know, people
who have, you know, like, well, I'm a utilitarian,
I'm afraid like the people who think that is
the best, best theory. Um YOU know, they'll often
sort of say, well, I can capture all of
those intuitions that you say my theory doesn't and
you know, it's bugged me for a while that
people like we will make this move and but
then they never actually care about. So like, you
know, de onto contents will say, you know, we
care about like virtue, ethics, like content, the metaphysics
of moral spent the entire second half of the
book talking about virtue and then they like never
actually talk about it, right. Um And the idea
is like, actually, you know, it's fine in so
far as we take multiple approaches. Um AS long
as we don't, you know, think that one approach
has to be like the single correct approach because
again, I think that given the real, yeah, the
genuine descriptive fact, the non normative fact that we
think in terms of perspectives and that we're, you
know, not like omniscient or like epistemic omnipotent. Um
We can't have a single correct ethical theory, an
ethical theory that will capture everything we needed to
capture. So we need um multiple ones
would one of the ways that these more pluralistic
perspective would work. Uh Is I, I mean, I'm
asking you this because actually, uh actually recently, once
it came to my mind, this idea, I mean,
would it be, for example that for uh individual
ethical problems, you would apply a specific perspective without
having to like the same perspective to every single
issue? Because it came to my mind actually, recently
that uh I mean, just by noticing how people
many times shift perspectives when dealing with different ethical
problems. Oh The uh uh now you're being a
consequentialist there, you the onto whatever uh is that
something, right? Uh I mean, that's one of the
ways how we would manifest.
Yeah. So, and I think this is a really,
it's a great question and I think it's a
really complex question. So I think, you know, for
me, one of the, the lessons from this approach
is kind of like a personal intellectual humility, right?
So when I'm making decisions, like I should be
listening to others because I should know that my
perspective is limited. Um OTHER people might be tracking
things that I'm not tracking. So like uh an
example of this, um I was like, sort of,
we were like doing a workshop in my department
and um there was sort of like a, a
question, the question was like, you know, you know,
you're a faculty member and one of your graduate
students that you're advising comes up to you on
campus and they, like, seem very flustered and they
ask like, um can you meet with me this
afternoon? And these sort of the idea is like,
and yeah, you sort of had already blocked off
the time to do something that, you know, like
you could set it aside, but you kind of
don't want to, what should you do? And I
sort of said, well, like for me personally, like,
use some social intelligence, like, how flustered do they
look? Does it look like a genuine emergency or
not? And one of my colleagues, like a great
philosopher, philosopher, I'm good friend. She had like entirely
different approach and she was like, well, would it
be re like, is it a reasonable ask for
everyone to do that, like to use their social
intelligence, what would be reasonable for like any faculty
member to do in this situation? And to me,
and I was like, oh, this is kind of
like a con and virtue ethics sort of thing.
Um And it was like, philosophically interesting because we
were asking sort of two different, like ethical questions.
So like, one, I was asking like, what would
be the best thing for me to do, given
my personality and my abilities? Um AND she was
asking then like, what would be a reasonable expectation
to have of others like a at a workplace
like ours? And, you know, at first I was
like, well, I my perspective is correct, but I
thought like, no, that's also an important aspect of
this question, right? So there's this sort of like
intellectual humility point that by having and listening to
other perspective, like there's more moral information that are
tracking in the other side to this though is
at the end of the day, we do need
to make a decision and then if we're just
sort of like, get stuck listening to other perspectives
that doesn't help us very much. And I think
it's incredibly important um for us like a to
develop our own personal moral approaches, to think about
like, what commitments do we want to develop in
our lives to have our own moral projects. So
while we should listen to others, I personally, I
mean, and a person maybe could their, their life,
moral project might be like relativist, maybe Zhuang's of
the ancient Chinese philosopher was like this. But for
most of us, I think it's important to sort
of develop our own appro like, what do we
value, what are our deepest commitments as a way
of, sort of making sense of the world and
finding meaning in our moral lives? So, it's a
tension that I don't think it's, like, easily or
at all resolvable, but I think it's a felt
tension of human life.
Mhm. Yeah. And actually related to what I just
comment a minute ago, uh, I've noticed many times.
I, I actually don't know if there's any scientific
work done on this or not. I mean, if
people in terms of their preferred ethical theory, uh,
tend to be consistent or not. But since, since
I, I mean, I work in science communication, basically
I move in science communication circles and I don't
know exactly why, but apparently there's many science communicators
who are fond of utilitarianism. But, yeah. But, but
just to finish. But then I, I asked them
just to tease them a little bit. Oh, so,
so if you're a pure utilitarian, why do you
believe in human rights?
Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. And I think, um, and this
is like, what my, I found utilitarianism so intuitive
until these sorts of questions came up and I
still find it very, like, very intuitive, um, in
so many areas. But and I think that's probably
part of the story here is, you know, like,
oh, this gives us a nice answer and a
very compelling answer for a lot of kinds of
cases, right? It seems to be tracking exactly what
we should be tracking in many cases. But then
when you start asking these other questions, um a
lot of people's intuition in the show.
And so how does all of this link to
your interest in Confucian ethics? And, and by the
way for the audience, mainly, what is Confucian ethics,
what characterizes it?
Yeah. So this is something that I didn't expect
to be interested in before I started graduate school
in philosophy. I lived in South Korea for three
years. And when I was there, especially among young
people there, Confucianism was kind of a, well, that
kind of negative word. It was a negative word
where they meant just sort of this old traditionalist
way of thinking where you have to be respectful
to your parents and old people no matter how
ridiculous or mean they are. Um And you have
to be. And so it was like a really
negative sort of um idea about it. Then when
I started my phd program, I was sort of
assigned to be a graduate, teaching assistant to an
introduction to age and philosophy class. And I started
to learn about, you know, what did the original
text actually say? And I was really blown away
by by that. Um And that's in, you know,
large parts of like, wonderful teacher, Amy Oberon. But
what's going on here? So this is um some
of the oldest, like robust ethical theory and debates
that we have. Yeah, around 3000 years ago in
like West today China, there was a highly successful,
like, highly academic, highly bureaucratic um government, like then
a dynasty called the Zhou dynasty. And, you know,
they just sort of have their problems, but for
the most part, they have like a period of
relative peace, relative prosperity. It's unlike sort of like
ancient Greek philosophy which develops in like small city
states. It's over a huge swath of land. So
there's a huge bureaucracy, there's a large educational system.
Um So like public, like small, like public schools
and villages, towns and cities. Um AND that training
system sort of feeds into like government officials and
you need a lot of government officials. Um The
in part because you need lots of food for
this, you know, like large area and you have
these floodplains and you, so you need lots of
big government projects to deal with all of the
flooding. Like so you have this, they start to
sort of lose power, um start to decline. And
so around 500 BC, they've sort of lost all
of their power. But people have been like, kept
records of these, you know, golden ages and you
still sort of have this big bureaucracy, um including
like one group of people that are scholar officials.
And these scholar officials have lots of different ideas
about how to run government, um how to live
our lives. One of the most influential factions of
these government officials, these scholar officials were what we
call English, the Confucians. Um IN Chinese, they were
called the rule. And they sort of seem to
be originally kind of like the priest class. So
they were in charge of religious rituals and ceremonies,
um kind of like courtly ceremonies, things like that.
They were the ones who were experts and in
charge of that, they were also as part of
their training. They also had to be experts in
history, kind of like the history of public policy
and things like that and also like the history
of literature. So like ancient poems um around, yeah,
right around 500 BC, like around that era. Um
WE have Confucius uh Konsa and Confucius is not
the first like member of this group, but he
seems to be able to articulate the underlying ethos
of this group in an incredi in a way
that's sort of incredibly compelling and influential. And so
he says that he like, he doesn't invent anything,
he just sort of transmit. So the idea is
sort of that in the past, there was a
golden age, we figured it out, we figured out
how to have a good, stable, prosperous society where
people live flourishing lives. We've lost track of that.
But what did they do? What was so special
about that? And so by Confucius's life, things were
like, going terribly civil war was on the horizon
very clearly. And he wants to, like, stop this,
like, go back to what was working in the
golden age. And so if you, like, say, like,
well, how do we stop this crisis? How do
we get back to the golden age? You might
say, well, what were the, the laws that they
used? What were the policies that they used? What
did they do? That was so special. Confucius is
kind of shocking answer was what was special about
what they did was were their rituals sort of
like their system of manners and etiquette. And that,
like, it should be a very, like the first
time I heard that's a like etiquette, like, come
on. Right. That doesn't matter all that much. Like,
it's nice, I guess to be polite, right? But
it doesn't matter all that much and think about
like in western philosophy, some of our heroes, Socratic
Gadfly, like according to the, I think the stereotypes
are incorrect, but according to that stereotype, you know,
he's far from polite. Um AND maybe like socially
oblivious. I think that's an incorrect understanding of Socrates,
but that's like a pretty common view. So sort
of the way that Confucius explains this puts serves,
puts this all together is something like this. It
all starts and ends with good government and by
good government, I, he means something like non corrupt
and well informed. So they sort of like, make
good decisions. Um So they have good information and
you can think about like, they needed to take
care of all this flooding and things like that
and you had to like, keep an empire going
over, you know, huge lots of land. Um, SO
if you don't have that, you know, good luck.
Right. Which to me seems, you know, like sensible,
if you have, are living in an area with
a highly corrupt or um, a highly, a government
that makes absolutely terrible choices. Like, yeah, good luck
you might be able to get by, um, if
you're like, really clever or really lucky. But again,
good luck. But then the question is, how do
you get good government? Well, he says we start
with family. You need a good upbringing, right? You
need families to raise their Children. Well, how do
you do that? Well, you need a good education
system. Well, how do you do that? Um, WELL,
the education system has to be tied back into
the government. The education system has to train us
to be like, good smart, non corrupt government officials.
And so like, we've got this cycle. How do
you do all of this? And he says what
the successful dynasty of the past, what they did
ingeniously was they invented a system of social etiquette
of social norms, rituals that at every step of
the way helped to do these things. Um And
so just, and the idea is like, he has
stories about like every literal ritual and how it
helps us um like, be a better person in
like little ways um or make better decisions. So
you give like one example that I found like,
really interesting um when you're a government official and
you have like a tablet that has like a
new law or policy, the ritual is you act
as if that tablet is very, very heavy, much
heavier than it actually is. So why do you
do that? And this is to me where it
gets really ingenious because for the Confucians, they thought
the ancient SAGES developed this based on a really,
really good understanding of human psychology. So they thought
in human psychology, heaviness is associated with seriousness. So
in English, we say like gravitas, right? Gravity gravitas.
So if you like actors of this policy is
very heavy, it reminds you this is serious, this
policy will affect people, right? Um And so the
idea is they have all of these rituals and
all arenas of life that sort of provide this
like script, this sort of directly helps us to
do something that's really good, but also trains us
over time to associate different things together. And so
it ends up being this really, really robust, psychologically
rich picture of moral development. And I found that
absolutely fascinating.
So, but what is then exactly the connection between
that those aspects of Confucian ethics and what we
talked about just a minute ago in terms of
your perspective on ethics.
Yeah, absolutely. So the, like the philosophy that was
emerging at this time obviously is not the philosophy
that emerged in like 20th century English speaking philosophy
world, right? So there wasn't, you know, a clear,
I mean, there wasn't always a might not be
a clear distinction between what we would call meta
ethics and normative ethics today. But there definitely wasn't
back then. So like, were the Ancient Confucians more
realist or anti realist or something like, I don't
know, but there are little hit like things that
they say every once in a while that to
me suggests that it is something kind of like
this constructivist picture or at least very useful for
contemporary philosophers. So I mentioned earlier, there's um a
couple 100 years, several 100 years after Confucius. Um
AND Confucian philosopher named Shimza lived and he like
literally says the ancient stages invented ritual en, right?
And so, um his, and you know, there's a
lot of, he was also famous for saying that
human nature is inherently bad or evil or something
like that. Um He lost a lot of favor
for some of his beliefs and some of his
students and what they went on to do. Um
But to me, it seemed like either they did
believe or their approach was really useful for people
who are trying to develop a constructivist view, sort
of they thought that we have these different, like
numerous, like moral intuitions, emotions, dispositions. And we're trying
to make sense of them in the best way
that we can. And now what is the origin
of those? So some of the Confucian philosophers said,
you know, like there's heaven, right? This kind of
like godlike ish figure. Um AND heaven gives us
these dispositions or something like that. Um But at
the same time, there's this element in Confucian ethics
that is not always super interested in the supernatural
aspects of their views. So, um Confucius would refuse
to talk about. And so like students would ask
him like, how do I serve the ghost? And
he says, like, we'll figure out how to serve
the living. First. One of the Confucian's earliest critics,
the Moest say the Confucian don't actually believe in
any of the supernatural stuff. Shu I mentioned actually
comes out and says, there's no such thing as
like supernatural, like none of it actually exists. So
they, even though many of them are and might
be committed to sort of saying there is this
sort of supernatural origin, what they're really interested in
is given all of these different emotions and dispositions
that we have. How do we make sense of
it? How do we um construct a society and
construct our own lives and So, for people who
are um familiar with early Confucian ethics here might
be thinking of one of the most philosophers in
all, all the world, but especially East Asia menus
among who thought specifically they're like four like moral
sprouts is like probably a good translation, like these,
a set of inclinations that we just naturally have.
And, and to me, it's interesting because it's not
just one. So it's not like the ethics of
technology view, but like we have multiple um dispositions
and we have to like what's the best way
of making sense of fitting them all together. And
to me that's useful for constructiveness, whether the yearly
Confucians actually could best be described as something along
those lines or not.
You know, that is actually very interesting, at least
in two different ways. So one of them is
that uh at least in the western philosophical tradition,
I, I mean, perhaps there would be different readings
of these, but at least my reading is that
uh whether you're, you fall more on the camp
of the ontology or consequential, more virtue ethics or
contractual or something like that, there's a sort of
moral, moral realist assumption underlying all of those different
ethical systems, right? But in that specific case, if
you're reading of Confucian ethics, you, right, there's at
least some and elements there. And then, uh I,
I mean, the other thing that I wanted to
mention is that there's also some interesting anthropological work
on. Uh I can't remember exactly if this was
done on western societies or some traditional societies. But
at least there are societies out there where uh
uh uh a majority of people uh tend toward
the relativist perspective that is they think that the
norms that operate in their society are objective and
question it. But they are, but they also allow
for other societies to have different norms and they
think that whatever norms they have are as objective
for them as their own norms are for themselves.
So I I mean, just to say that uh
we shouldn't assume neither moral realism for human nature,
even for philosophy in general, nor universalism. That is
assuming that uh our own nor moral values, moral
preferences lie to everyone out there a
absolutely. And I think this is so important. This
is one of the things that kind of really
struck me as I was learning about classical Chinese
philosophy because there are often like many ass some
like shared assumptions or shared views. But there are
also like little but very important differences. So for,
you know, I mentioned earlier, the students who come
into like internet ethics, it's like human beings are
fundamentally selfish. Um THAT'S actually not a common view
in classical Chinese philosophy whatsoever. And in fact, the
like one person who's the most associated with that
view, that sort of gets treated as radically like
a very radical view, the thought seems to be
that we're sort of inherently more interested in those
we care about. So like our family members, our
friends, our neighbors or stuff like that. And we're
also like selfish sometimes, but we are like other
interested in and with the I and so it
often gets translated like partial. So we're like, inherently
partial, but that doesn't mean we're like, necessarily inherently
selfish and like, you know, that actually seems to
be more like descriptively accurate than the sort of
like radical egoism that we often um find in
American discussions especially.
So let's move on to another topic. Now, you
also do work on epistemic injustice. So tell us
first of all what it is about.
Yeah. So this has been one of the hottest
topics in philosophy in the past 15 or 20
years. Um And I think incredibly important. So first,
like by epistemic, we mean things having to do
with knowledge, having to do with learning, understanding, share
it like good information, getting good information, sharing good
information, all of that sort of stuff. And there
are forms of injustice or forms of oppression or
marginalization that clearly have epistemic um impacts. So for
example, if schools, like if you live in a
racist society and schools and neighborhoods that are more
popular, densely populated by people in marginalized groups, get
less funding students who goes to those schools like
get less good edu like not as good of
an education, they have fewer opportunities, fewer, like less
support. They are epistemic worse off than they could
have been because of oppression, right? Um And so
that's something that I think philosophers for a long
time they like very aware of. Um In 2007,
a philosopher named Miranda Fricker um published a book
called epistemic Injustice. And this became a like huge
deal, a huge topic. And in that book, she
argued that over and above that there's a distinctive
epistemic form of injustice or oppression. There's a way
that injustice suppression, marginalization affects people as knower as
learners as sharers of knowledge and information. And that's
really, really, really interesting and part of what makes
it interesting might come through with some examples. So
I'll just like mention quickly three examples. Two of
these Miranda Fricker discussed in her work. Um These
are testimonial, injustice and hermeneutic injustice. Testimonial injustice is
kind of roughly when um like the main case
of testimonial justice is when a person trusts you
less takes you as less credible because of your
social identity, right? Um So your gender or your
race or something like that. Um And so we
know that this is a feature of how oppression
and marginalization works. So her examples of this, you
know, the, in the original book, um the most
famous example is like To Kill a Mockingbird, right?
So people dismissing someone's testimony like literal testimony in
a court case, uh just because of their racial
stereotypes Um And so this is something that like
when like from my experience teaching about this, the
students here about like many students, like I've experienced
that now I have a word for this, right?
So um this happens in various different ways um
And like very like complex ways that is like
been explored in a lot of detail since the
book came out. So that's testimonial injustice, hermeneutic injustice,
which yeah, a big word. But for something that's
a really, really fascinating idea, like having to do
with how we interpret the world. And the, the
rough idea is something like this. There are things
that happened to us that we don't have words
for yet. Sometimes that's just bad luck, right? So
imagine before we had a word for depression or
had a word for anxiety or a word for
um PTSD or something like that, we don't have
a word for it yet. Now, like we figured
out this is a thing, this is the thing
that happens. We've got a term for it that's
incredibly useful and helpful in various ways. It helps
us as we like, interpret the world, interpret our
experiences better. Now, there's questions like, why don't we
have a word for something? Well, a lot of
times it's just sort of like, I don't know,
bad luck. There's not really much of a story
there, but there are some cases where we don't
really have a good word. A good term. For
something because of oppression and marginalization. So Fricker's example
of this was the term sexual harassment. And so
the story behind that where um and we actually
like have a lot of detail about the development
of this term, right? And sort of the relevant
information here is that like sort of when it
was being described in the group that like, really
got this, like the terminology up and going, what
happened was everyone in the group was like all
the women in the group that were discussing this,
like, yeah, that happened to me, but I never
wanted to talk about like, I blamed myself or
I was too embarrassed or ashamed to talk about
this. And so because of social norms, like oppressive
prejudiced social norms, people didn't talk about it. And
so it took a lot longer to develop this
really important, powerful idea than it otherwise might have.
Another example of this is like postpartum depression, right?
Um If our sort of sexist expectations and norms
of that, you know, like as a woman, you
should be absolutely like in like, so in joyful
to have a baby and like this is, you
know, like the big goal of your life to
be a good mother. Like, why are you down
and you know, now we know like all these
really, really as problematic and informed views make it
difficult for pe for some people to notice and
track and explain what like something that happens and,
yeah, sorry for interrupting you. But actually, just to
add to that because postpartum depression of course, is
associated with sexism. But there's also, uh a broader,
uh, social theme, let's say that applies to both
men and women that I was just reading a
few minutes before we started the interview, uh, uh,
uh, an article on psychology today about people who
regret becoming parents and, and that's something that we
almost never hear about.
Yeah. Good. Yeah. There's lots of interesting stuff about
this where um yeah, it's the my understanding is
the research suggests that yeah, becoming a parent does
not make you happier. Now, you might find like
more meaning in it or like, you know, many
people say they don't regret doing it. But yeah,
it's stressful like I don't, yeah, you don't sleep
for years. Um And yes, and this is like,
um I think something that like the first time
I encountered it, like the very first feminist philosophy
class that I took in graduate school, it took
a lot of bit to click. But now it's
so obvious you have such strong narratives about parenting
and, you know, especially motherhood, but parenting in general
that just are incredibly dangerous, like in some cases,
just not true. But I think even if true,
incredibly dangerous because, you know, if the narrative is
like, this is one of the most important and
meaningful and joyful experiences of life, if you aren't
feeling joy in a particular moment. If you're feeling
stressed, what do you like? You can't deal with
that, you can't understand it, right? Um And that's
one of the reasons that this idea of hermeneutic
injustice is so interesting and powerful and the idea
like it's an incredibly stressful disorienting thing to experience
something but not have words for it. And it's
incredibly empowering thing to get a word for it.
OK. The last thing that I wanted to mention
about epistemic injustice in general. And this is um
work by like great philosophers like Gil Pole House
Junior and Christy Dodson who have said this idea
of hermeneutic injustice, we don't have a word for
some phenomenon that is affecting people. That's something that
you know, happens, but something else that happens, maybe
happens more often is actually the oppressed group has
words and has terminology and has been talking about
this stuff for a long time and people from
the in like oppressive groups from the dominant groups
can't and won't listen to it. And so you
can't contribute to the conversations because people just won't
believe you. And so for example, if you sort
of um have an encounter at your workplace that
strikes you as like kind of racist and you
bring it up and someone um replies and sort
of dismisses you and say, well, you're just playing
the race card. Mhm You can't really contribute to
the conversations even though you've been talking about it.
And so um many philosophers have pointed out that
this con like this, the phenomenon that people are
talking about when they're talking about epistemic injustice that
Fricker was talking about. Actually, people have been talking
about for a very, very long time. Um Feminist
philosophers have been talking about black feminist philosophers have
been talking about her for a long time. I
think um there are really, really like, I think
one of the best works on epistemic injustice is
Frederick douglas' speech. What to the slave is the
fourth of July um back in the 18 fifties,
right? So, um and so the last thing I'll
say this is, yeah, just in the last 20
or so years, 1520 years, there's just been an
explosion of interest in these topics and people thinking
through all of the different ways that this affects
us.
Mhm Yeah. So in the interest of time, I
have one more question that, that, that I would
like to ask you and perhaps later on in
the year, if you agree, we can have another
conversation to, to cover some of the other topics
that I have prepared. But I mean, just before
I get into the last question, uh I also
wanted to comment that uh I mean, this uh
epistemic injustice uh thing. I mean, it's very interesting
because while we were talking, for example, about postpartum
depression and stuff like that, I was thinking that
there are many ways in which people sort of
naturalize their own societal norms. And sometimes they, they
try to find in a sort of more natural
way or in nature, it's self a justification for
their norms. Like, for example, until a few decades
ago, no, probably virtually, no one used the term
almost sexual or gay. And then people started to
understand that there was probably nothing wrong with them.
They were just attracted to the same to people
of the same sex. And so now we have
this understanding of almost sexuality and what sexual is
and the same thing applies to probably a sexual
people because we just assume that everyone, uh, uh,
is, uh, sexually attracted to one or the other
sex or to anyone out there. And now we
know that there is a minority of people who
don't even, they are not interested in sex, they
don't want to have sex all of that. And,
and I guess that this is also important because,
uh, I, I brought up the example of people
who regret having kids and many, and perhaps it
would be interesting to know what would happen in
society if this sort of societal coercion to make
people have kids. Because I mean, sometimes people might
say, oh, you're complaining about that you're just a
cry baby. But yeah, it's sexual coercion because women
more than men, I guess, uh, might get ostracized
and all of that people might be down on
you if you're child was particularly past a certain
age and it would be very interesting to know
how many people would feel more at staying childless
throughout their entire life if you were not exposed
to this sort of social.
Right. Absolutely. I think these are so the first
thing is these are fantastic examples. I think of
something like hermeneutic justice, right? Improvements. Um, SO, yeah,
I think this is, and I think a really,
really unfortunate toxic element of like American society, many
other societies is sort of being really dismissive and
demeaning. Like people make fun of people of young
people. And now for saying like, oh, they have
all of these different genders and they're like constantly
changing their gender or things like that. It's so
so incredibly frustrating because to me, like, what's going
on is people are finally like better understanding their
own experience and coming up with words for their
own experience and finding that there are plenty of
others out there who like encounter these were like
asexuals and like, oh my gosh, that describes me
perfectly or bis, like there's so many different um
better words and this is like, you know, it's
actually been happening for much longer time, but now
it's um people are more and more aware of
it because of the internet and social media. And
so to me, this is like a great triumph
of hermeneutic injustice of hermeneutic justice. Sorry. Um Like
having these terms of people personally like encounter that.
Oh my gosh, that's me. Um And yes, so
I think that's a fantastic, a fantastic example of
this sort of phenomenon and why it matters so
much to people.
So my last question then, and I guess that
probably to a certain extent, this would also connect
to epistemic injustice. So you've done work on the
continuation for women in academic philosophy. So what could
you tell us about that?
Yeah, this is something that I've been. This is
actually like one of my first semesters in my
phd program was when I started doing this. And
so, yeah, the background here is there are many
academic fields that have diversity problems. That's no surprise
for academics on many fields that are um the
vast majority of faculty are white or white men
philosophy, historically had been um one of the least
diverse academic fields. I'm at the level of faculty
and especially tenured faculty. Um And people had been
concerned about this for a while and talked about
it for a while. Um But they hadn't necessarily
done a ton of actual empirical research for it,
which isn't that surprising given that we're philosophers, like
we sit in our armchair and try to figure
out um problems. And then, um you know, over
the past especially 10 years, people have started to
look at this empirically, try to get some data
about this. Um And like in general, people have
been in like the sciences have been doing this
for a while and doing lots of good research,
but people started to do this in philosophy. Um
One of the common stories is we say something
like a pipeline problem, right? So that fewer women
take philosophy classes than fewer women gr um major
in philosophy. And so fewer women study philosophy in
graduate school. And then like when you graduate school,
people don't finish graduate school for various reasons. So
they don't become that right? So um there's that
story, there was some research that and so this
the initial research that we published as a group
of scholars I like, was definitely not the only
person Heather dearest really led that team. Um And
we were interested in some research suggesting that in
philosophy, um actually, one of the biggest drop offs
occurred not in graduate school, which is what many
academic philosophers would assume. But right after introduction to
philosophy classes, and that was really interesting to us,
like, what is going on in intro of philosophy
that is making a philosophy very homogeneous. So what
we did was we sort of, we gave out
surveys at the beginning and end of every seme
uh of a semester in as many different intro
to philosophy type classes as we could and what
we found. And this is, you know, it was
just one study we had, you know, around, I
don't remember exactly 250. I want to say people,
which is, you know, 1000 would be better, but
it was not nothing. Um And what we found
two really interesting things. So, like we asked many
questions about their opinions and their feelings and their
experiences with the philosophy classes. Um AND some of
them, you know, maybe expected there to be a
big role in predicting how like would they take?
Were they interested in taking future philosophy classes? It
turned out that there were two questions we found
that had a shockingly big impact on whether they
reported that they wanted to take more philosophy classes.
And the one that has like been like, has
really, really been influential for me is this question,
I feel similar to the kinds of people who
become philosophers that was incredibly like from a social
science perspective, shockingly predictive of whether they said they
would take future philosophy classes at the beginning of
the semester. There was no difference between like self
identified men and women students at the end of
the semester. There was, and you know, it was
sort of like right on the border of like,
are we absolutely certain that this is like, you
know, um in fact, but so like, we need
more information, but it looks like that seems to
play a big role. The other question was I
enjoy thinking about philosophical questions and puzzles and now
I wish that we would have said, like, I
enjoy thinking about philosophical issues or something like that.
I wonder what the questions and puzzles, but the
way that we, you know, phrased that was doing
because we didn't expect that one to actually do
anything. Um, THAT one had a gender difference at
the beginning of the semester, the widened over the
course of the semester. But the thing that, yeah,
it really struck me as like, what kind of
signals are we sending in our classes about who
belongs in philosophy? And so I've come to think,
you know, um why be surprised if your syllabus
is all dead white men that your students are
all live white men, like live white men. There's
so many little signals that we send about who
does philosophy, who doesn't do it. Um And part
of that is like who's on the reading list,
but they're also like much subtler things. So my
go to example of this is, well, two of
them, one thing we come like frequently say philosophy
began in Ancient Greece. That's a very common thing
that people will say an introduction to philosophy classes.
So, I mean, philosophy probably began about five minutes
after the first verbal disagreement that human beings had,
right? Um Like, what do you mean that I'm
not a good hunter? I don't know, like, what
do you mean these berries aren't good enough?
Um I mean, then when it comes even to
let, let's, even if we talk just about people
who lived as philosophers, we, we have done some
intellectual work of that, of that kind. I mean,
even now we know that that Ancient Athenian and
Greek philosophers were probably influenced by the Persians, the
Indians. And
exactly, exactly. And so in the sense that the
Ancient Greeks thought that philosophy probably originated in Ancient
Egypt, um many of them like literally say that
and like relatedly and again, the little signals we
send in philosophy. If you specialize in the subfield,
ancient Greek and Roman philosophy, we use shorthand, we
say ancient. So when we say ancient in academic
philosophy, at least in the US and UK, that
means ancient Greek, it really means kind of Plato
and Aristotle. But it's like changing a little bit.
It really means like ancient Greek. But philosophy existed
in like that we have in Ancient India and
Ancient China, ancient Egypt. Um But like we know
it. So when we like send the subtle signals
that we send about who does philosophy and why
I think end up having like, yeah, the subtle
and then the not so subtle signal, like again,
is the syllabus, like only you know, dead white
guys or people who even though like the ancient
Greeks were not Western Europeans in any way, shape
or form, but they get kind of whitewashed in
some ways of talking and teaching about them.
Maybe, maybe in the university, the philosophy departments where
people do not teach Chinese Arabic, Indian African philosophy,
they should be called western philosophy.
I mean, you know, like color horse to horse.
Yeah. And so, uh, were you about to say
something else about this issue of women not continuing
in their philosophy?
And I think that there's so much research like
this still needs to be done about that. It's
a very complex problem. Um, AND this is like,
far from the only, like there are tons of
well known issues about, you know, sexism and academia
and academic philosophy. So, you know, it's a big
problem with multiple causes. But I think one of
the important issues that people should be aware of,
like in their own teaching and presentation of philosophy
is the signals they send about who belongs, who
does philosophy, the big signals, the direct signals and
the indirect signals that we signed about who does
philosophy because students pick up on that.
And, and so in your mind, what would be
some possible solutions for that if, if those are
the causes? I mean, would we need for example,
to talk more about women philosophers in history or
even contemporary women philosophers or to have more women
philosopher, role models in academia?
Yeah. And so this is like in that original
paper that um that came out um an analysis
of those years ago, one of the things we
suggested what we call them, like counter stereotypical exemplars,
right? So like in your class, emphasizing people who
don't fit that mold of, like the stereotypes of
a lot, you know, an old white lonely hermit
with a beard sort of thing. Um And there
are many, like, in fact, maybe more canal philosophers
than most don't fit that stereotype. Um I think
again, it's a multifaceted problem with multifaceted solutions. So
departments should be hiring people that can teach non
western philosophy um philosophers, you know, we're, everyone's overextended
and overworked and we don't have enough time to
learn about our own specialization. But I mean, in
my own department here at Harvard, so many people
have been like slowly including more and more non
western philosophy in their classes, especially like intro classes
um in ways that like they find very rewarding
and interesting. Um And or is often less difficult
than people expect to do um when they, you
know, put off doing it. And yeah, so I
think it's a multifaceted problem and it needs a
multifaceted solution, but a big part of it is
um just do like just doing and having people
that can talk and teach about philosophy sort of
outside and also sort of like problematic the can.
So like some of the um philosophers here who
specialize in early modern philosophy have done really, really
cool work. People who maybe they were very important
in their own, like Mary Shepherd, Mary Estelle and
um but didn't get included in the Canon for
various reasons. Um Francois Poulain de la Barre is
one who just blew my mind. Um And so
there's so many different options that people have for
teaching philosophy in a more welcoming way. And it's,
it's healthier. It presents philosophy as something that people
everywhere all over the world have been concerned about.
And students really respond to that and react to
that much better than this story. We used to
tell that philosophy began in Ancient Greece and it's
this one great conversation that like eight white people
had that we're going to learn about.
Yeah. No, I definitely think that people should listen
to Peter Adamson's History of Philosophy without any gaps.
It's fantastic.
Yeah, it, it's phenomenal. Right?
And, and so Doctor Robertson, I'm getting really mindful
of your time now. So probably it's better for
us to wrap up the interview here just before
we go. Would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Yeah. So I have a website that I haven't
updated in a while that at robertson.net. And then
I tried to update that with some of my
current work and recent publications. Um But yeah, thank
you so much for having me. It was really,
really wonderful to talk about these um topics with
you.
No, thank you so much. It's been really fun
to talk to you. Hi guys. Thank you for
watching this interview until the end. If you liked
it, please share it. Leave a like and hit
the subscription button. The show is brought to you
by the N Lights learning and development. Then differently
check the website at N lights.com and also please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal. I
would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and paypal supporters, Perera Larson,
Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O of
Alex Adam Kel Matthew Whitten B are no wt
Ho Erica LJ Connors Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the
Met Robert Wine in NAI Z Mark Nevs calling
Hol Brookfield governor Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for
Agns Ferus and H her me and Lain Jung
Y and the K Hes Mar Smith J Tom
Humble S David Sloan Wilson de Ro Ro Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall. Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Dey junior, Old Ebon,
Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn,
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis, Mark Kemple Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica. No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man
George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van Goler, Alexander
Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer
Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik
Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman,
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and
Rosie. Thank you for all.